Hello, I'm Allan Schaffe,
the Graphics and
Media Technology Evangelist at Apple.
This presentation is the
first in a two-part series on
mastering OpenGL ES for iPhone.
There's a lot to learn.
Part 1 focuses on the environment that
OpenGL ES operates in on the iPhone OS.
I cover OpenGL ES versions and the
devices where they're supported.
And I explain the iPhone OS display
system and walk you through
optimizing the interaction between
OpenGL ES and Core Animation.
Then I introduce CA DisplayLink,
which can replace your use of
NS Timer to drive your rendering loop.
And finally,
conclude with details about how
OpenGL ES applications should take
advantage of the ARM architecture.
And whereas Part 1 focuses on
the environment around OpenGL ES,
Part 2 shines a spotlight onto
mastering OpenGL ES itself.
I explain the common architecture and the
capabilities of the graphics processors,
and then dive into specific
performance recommendations for
optimizing texture and geometry.
So I hope you'll learn
a lot from both parts.
Now let's get started with Part 1.
So OpenGL ES is the interface
for high-performance 3D
graphics on the iPhone.
And it goes beyond 3D.
It is also the dominant
API for hardware-accelerated 2D
sprite-based rendering as well.
Now, OpenGL ES is the mobile variant of
the OpenGL standard from the desktop.
It's defined by an industry
consortium called the Kronos Group,
of which Apple is an active participant.
And OpenGL ES really provides
a distillation of the scope
of the desktop version of
OpenGL and is a subset of the API.
It's been pared down to an interface
that's appropriate to the capabilities
and feature set of embedded devices.
Now, the OpenGL ES API itself
is really easy to learn,
but mastering OpenGL ES can
be more difficult.
There's a lot to absorb.
Of course,
the first things you need to learn
are the principles of 3D graphics,
things like 3D transformations
and linear algebra,
and the concepts of defining vertices,
normals, and colors,
and then how those ideas are
expressed in the OpenGL API and
OpenGL shading language.
Then you need to also understand the
architecture of the rendering system
and the stages of the graphics pipeline.
Because OpenGL is a state machine,
but it's implemented in
a pipelined architecture,
so understanding the purpose of the
various pipeline stages becomes critical
to understanding the API itself.
So that's just the beginning,
but this represents just the
basics of what's necessary to
become proficient with OpenGL ES.
Then there's always platform-specific
behavior that you have to master as well.
How OpenGL fits into the display system,
the render loop,
and any CPU-specific behaviors
for the devices that your
app might be running on.
And the attributes of the
graphic processor as well.
Its capabilities, its limits,
and any device-specific
extensions or best practices.
And mastering this complexity is
achieved by coding defensively,
testing for the presence
of capabilities you need,
and querying the extensions and limits
of the device you're running on.
And either providing the full
functionality in your app
if the capability is there,
or providing fallbacks if it's not.
And finally, in this category,
there's a variety of optimization
techniques that become critical
to mastering OpenGL ES.
It's specific to each stage
of the graphics pipeline.
And finally, there's many topics from
the supporting technologies,
such as any software you use
for 3D modeling or texture
painting or creating shaders.
There's a variety of more advanced
techniques from the world of scene
graphs and game engines to provide
higher-level decisions about what
needs to be drawn and how to draw it.
Things like making the simple
observation that certain objects in
your scene might be off-screen at the
moment and don't need to be submitted
to the 3D graphics hardware at all,
saving the hardware from having
to do all that extra processing.
And then more expert 3D
rendering techniques themselves,
such as multi-pass effects
and more advanced shaders.
So as you can see,
this is a really long list,
but it begins to explain the background
and information you'll want to learn more
about as you learn about using OpenGL ES.
Now, in this presentation,
I focus on this middle section
having to do with many of the
iPhone-specific optimizations and best
practices you'll need to know about.
In Part 1,
I focus on OpenGL versions and OpenGL's
interaction with the display system,
the render loop,
and the ARM architecture.
In Part 2,
the focus is on platform capabilities,
extensions, and limits,
and optimizations for
texture and geometry.
Now back in June this year at WWDC,
we introduced the first iPhone devices
that supported OpenGL ES version
2.0 and the ability to use a fully
programmable graphics pipeline.
So I'd like to describe some of
what this change really means.
OpenGL ES 1.1 is the API that
we had been using since the
beginning of iPhone OS devices.
This targets what's called a
fixed function graphics pipeline.
And what that means is that the
various stages of the pipeline,
the command processing,
3D transformations,
the lighting calculations,
and rasterization, fog, depth test,
and other stages, all have fixed or
predefined functionality.
And you, the developer,
have the ability to enable or disable
various parts of the pipeline.
And you can configure various
parameters for each stage,
but the calculations done are predefined
and fundamentally cannot be changed.
Whereas OpenGL ES version 2.0 replaces
many of these fixed pipeline stages
with fully programmable stages,
where you, the developer,
write the code that will perform
the calculations for each stage.
So if you want higher quality
lighting calculations,
for example,
you simply implement that yourself
in a C-like shading language.
And either have your algorithm run on a
per vertex or per pixel basis as commands
are submitted to the graphics hardware.
This enables an entirely new realm of
capabilities for developers to create
interactive 3D experiences and at a
performance level that's never been
seen before on a mobile platform.
These are some examples of the kinds of
algorithms that can now be expressed in
the GPU with a programmable pipeline.
Unique lighting models,
as I've just mentioned,
the ability to have bump maps and
environment maps for reflection and
refraction performed by the GPU,
various operations on the frame
buffer for image processing,
and a lot more.
So I'd like to start by actually showing
you a demo that we developed at WWDC that
really shows off some of the capabilities
of the iPhone 3GS with OpenGL ES 2.0.
So this demo is from a familiar genre.
The ball moves from side to side,
bouncing off my bat and off the walls
as I try to score against the AI.
And you can see a smoke texture
being laid down in the scene at the
location of the ball each frame and
then becoming part of the background.
And as you can see,
there's a fluid dynamic simulation
actually running in a number of shaders,
computing the density and
velocity of the smoke particles.
And you can see as I move my bat
up and down that it affects the
smoke in the region around it.
But the key is that all of the
simulation is happening on the GPU.
This leaves the CPU free
to do everything else,
the AI, the game dynamics,
any networking, playing audio, and so on.
Now,
since all of this is implemented using
shaders in the programmable pipeline,
if I want to change modes,
I can actually just change shaders.
So here is a bump map shader.
Nine lines of GLSL,
it takes a normal map and attenuates
the light based on the normal and does
the correct falloff for that light.
And I hope this gives you the inspiration
to learn more about OpenGL ES 2.0
and use it within your apps.
So for those of you who are beginners,
I'd like to point out a few resources
to help you learn OpenGL ES.
The first is the OpenGL ES Programming
Guide for iPhone from Apple.
This has a lot of platform-specific
information and tuning advice that
you'll want to take advantage of.
The next is the OpenGL ES 2.0
Programming Guide called the Gold Book.
This book was actually written prior
to the introduction of the iPhone,
but now this author has developed
a number of iPhone-compatible code
samples on their companion website.
So it's highly recommended,
especially to help you learn
about shader programming and the
capabilities of the OpenGL ES 2.0 API.
Then there's a number of
books that originated from
the desktop version of OpenGL.
And the first of these is the
OpenGL Shading Language book called the
Orange Book and now in its third edition.
This is a great resource for learning
how to write shaders in GLSL.
And once you've learned that,
it's easy to carry that understanding
over into learning GLSL ES.
The next is the
OpenGL programming guide itself,
the Redbook, now in the 7th edition.
This is the definitive treatment
for OpenGL from the desktop and will
teach you a lot of the concepts of
OpenGL that carry over into OpenGL ES.
The OpenGL Super Bible,
currently in its fourth edition,
another book originally
written for the desktop,
but in this edition,
there's a chapter detailing the
changes you make for OpenGL ES.
And finally,
there are a number of resources online,
such as the OpenGL.org website,
where you'll find the
OpenGL ES specification
and some developer forms.
And finally, for beginners,
the ideal place for you
to get started is with the
OpenGL ES application template in Xcode.
This will show you how to get
an OpenGL ES application up and
running with an animation loop
and an OpenGL ES context and
frame buffer all set up for you.
Now, for those of you who are already
familiar with OpenGL ES on the iPhone,
there are three key changes that
we've made in the template in the
3.1 version of the SDK that you
really should go take a look at.
The first is that the template now
supports both OpenGL ES 1.1 and 2.0.
It makes a runtime decision of the
renderer based on whether the context
creation is successful or not.
The second is that the render loop
of the template is now being driven
by something new we've added in
iPhone OS 3.1 called CA Display Link.
Or if you're not running 3.1,
then it will fall back to an
older method of using NS Timer.
Now, I'll have a lot more to say about
CA Display Link in just a minute.
And the third change to note is
that the OpenGL ES 2.0 path is
now using a simple vertex and
fragment program for rendering.
And this is really useful for developers
who are accustomed to OpenGL ES 1.1.
and could use a simple example
of just how to set up a shader.
So now let's dive deeper into
the specifics of OpenGL ES 1.1
and 2.0 on iPhone OS.
So here's a chart outlining the platform
support for OpenGL ES 1.1 and 2.0.
And I'll be referring back to this
several times during the presentation.
But the first thing to notice
is that OpenGL ES 1.1 is
supported across all devices.
So an application you wrote using
1.1 in the early days of the iPhone
SDK will continue to function,
even on the latest hardware.
Now, certain devices also support the
programmable pipeline of OpenGL ES 2.0.
And specifically,
this is the iPhone 3GS and the
32 and 64 gigabyte versions of
the third generation iPod touch.
That support correlates to the
graphics processor used in each device.
So the iPhone 3GS and third
generation iPod touch both
use the PowerVR SGX processor
from Imagination Technologies.
And all the other devices, the iPhone,
iPhone 3G, and first and second
generation iPod touch use the
PowerVR MBX Lite processor as their GPU.
Now in Part 2 of the presentation,
I'll be going into a lot of detail
about the common architecture and the
differences between the SGX and MBX Lite.
But one more point to simply note is that
both versions of OpenGL ES can coexist on
the same device if the GPU supports that.
And applications simply make a runtime
decision of the renderer and API.
So here's how you configure
which version of OpenGL ES you'll
use in your application.
The code for actually choosing
the API is nothing new.
It's configured by your OpenGL context,
which on iPhone OS is handled
by an Eagle context object.
And when you initialize that object,
you'll indicate which API version to use.
In the case here,
we're configuring our Eagle context
to use the OpenGL ES 1.1 API.
And assuming that's successful,
we'll go on to use the fixed
function pipeline normally.
Now, as I said,
it's possible for one application
to be written to support both
of these API versions and make a
runtime decision of which one to use,
essentially based on the
hardware you're running on.
In such a case,
you'd first attempt to create
an OpenGL ES 2.0 context.
And if that's successful,
then it means you're running on a
device which supports OpenGL ES 2.0.
You can load shaders and go on to
use the 2.0 API and the capabilities
of a programmable pipeline.
However, in the same app,
if it happens to be running on a device
that only supports OpenGL ES 1.1,
then the attempt to create
a 2.0 context will fail.
And we'll fall into this second
bit of code where we're attempting
to create a 1.1 context.
Presumably, that will succeed and the
app will go on to use the 1.1
API and fixed function pipeline.
So this is a very important capability.
You're able to write a single
application that takes advantage of
the programmable pipeline when running
on a device with that capability,
while simultaneously supporting
the fixed function GPUs in the
rest of the product line to get the
broadest possible device coverage.
Now,
there's a final example to take note of.
You can develop your application to
only support OpenGL ES 2.0 and use that
API in the programmable pipeline without
providing any fallback to OpenGL ES 1.1,
as shown here.
However, if you do this,
then you should also indicate that
requirement in your InfoP list.
In iPhone OS 3.0 and above,
you're able to specify a list
of required device capabilities.
OpenGL ES 2.0 is one of the
requirements that you can set up.
And actually,
this is just one from a whole
list that you can choose from.
If your application required, let's say,
the accelerometer and the
magnetometer and OpenGL ES 2.0,
you can list these under the
UI required device capabilities token.
Then those requirements would
be reflected in the on-device
version of the App Store when a
user goes to purchase your app.
So next, I want to dive deeper into some
of the specific information about
using OpenGL ES on the iPhone OS.
And I'll be covering these three topics.
First,
the interaction between OpenGL ES and
the compositing and animation
system provided by Core Animation.
Then, some of the new functionality
that's been added in iPhone OS 3.1
to drive your rendering loop.
And finally, a brief mention at the end
regarding optimizing for the
ARM processor architecture.
So, let's start with the display system.
The interaction between OpenGL ES and
the display system on iPhone
is handled by Core Animation.
Core Animation really acts as the
display manager on the iPhone,
much in the same way that a
window manager on your desktop
handles multiple applications,
each with its own window.
On the iPhone, Core Animation handles
typically a single application,
but with a hierarchy of views that might
be animated and composited together.
Now, layers are the fundamental building
blocks used by core animation.
We say that views are backed by a layer.
This means that UIView contents
get cached into a layer.
And likewise,
OpenGL ES content is rendered into a
layer subclass called CA Eagle Layer.
And all that's special about
a CA Eagle Layer is that it
knows how to reference the color
render buffer attachment of
a frame buffer object in OpenGL.
Layers may be animated and
composited as your application
manipulates its view hierarchy,
and any CA Eagle layers just become
another participant in all of this.
So, let's look at this more conceptually.
Your application has some
data in a vertex array,
which it will render with OpenGL ES,
and the resulting pixels end up in the
Color Render Buffer attachment to an FBO.
The Eagle layer object knows how to
reference the contents of that FBO.
So at this point,
we're just dealing with pixels and
OpenGL can fall out of the picture.
And the UI view is backed by a
layer that just happened to have
its contents generated by OpenGL.
That view and layer just become another
participant with other views you
might also have in a view hierarchy.
For example, in this case,
compositing with the
UI label and UI slider.
So, the task for OpenGL developers
is to optimize this interaction.
And doing so means minimizing
the compositing work to be done.
And it turns out there's five
things that can slow this down,
listed here, and I'll go through them in
more detail in just a moment.
But it involves such things
as the properties you set
on your CA Eagle layer,
the color format, retained backing,
any transformations and its opacity,
and any other activity that
might be taking place in the
rest of the view hierarchy.
And it's worth noting that
some of these have more of a
performance impact than the others.
The first is the color format.
So this is a property
of the CA Eagle layer,
and it can be set either to RGBA8,
the default,
for a 32-bit deep color render
buffer format with alpha,
or RGB 565, which is 16 bits deep.
Now, RGB 565 provides half the
color precision of RGBA8,
but it uses half the memory
bandwidth each frame.
The reason why this is important,
potentially, is because, in particular,
the devices that have the
PowerVR MBX Lite are also very
sensitive to memory bandwidth.
And the performance of your application,
in many cases, might be bottlenecked by
the system memory bandwidth.
So anything you can do to reduce
the pressure on memory bandwidth
could have a big performance benefit.
The second property to
mention is retained backing,
or sometimes this is
referred to as backing store.
This determines whether the contents
of your color render buffer will be
preserved after it's been presented.
That's somewhat unusual
in OpenGL applications,
so it's off by default.
But turning it on means that
a copy of your render buffer
will be made each frame,
with a performance cost
associated with making that copy.
The third on our list
was transformations.
Your CA Eagle layer.
This is where your
OpenGL content is being rendered.
It will be composited fastest
if no scaling transformation
is applied to the layer,
no subpixel translations
are applied to the layer,
and with a few limited exceptions,
if no rotation is applied to the layer.
The only exception that applies is
that on the iPhone 3GS and both the
second and third generation iPod touch,
rotations that are a multiple of
90 degrees can be done without any
compositing performance penalty.
But any other rotation, 1 degree,
45 degrees, and so on,
or any other devices, namely the iPhone,
the iPhone 3G,
and the original iPod touch,
will cause extra compositing
work if any rotation is applied.
So the advice we've given to
date has been to generally avoid
setting any layer.transform.
And instead, for example,
to rotate your OpenGL content
into landscape orientation,
you'd simply use a 3D transformation
on the model view matrix in OpenGL.
And also swap your viewport
width and height to handle
the change in orientation.
But you should also watch out for
any view controller above you in
the hierarchy that may be putting
a 90-degree rotation on you.
In that case, you may need to put an
inverse rotation on your
CA Eagle there so they cancel out.
Unless, as I had mentioned,
your app happens to be running
on one of the devices that can
do a rotation without penalty.
The fourth topic is blended content.
And so there's several scenarios.
Other views might be composited
on top of your CA Eagle layer
or your CA Eagle layer might be
composited on top of other views.
And in either of these two cases,
whatever's on top might be
opaque or might have alpha.
The first case,
where you have other views composited
on top of a CA Eagle layer.
This is actually okay.
This is, for example,
an OpenGL scene that has some
buttons or a slider or some
text overlaid on top of it.
You'll see some loss of performance
if the overlaid views aren't opaque.
And anytime they change their
content or are animated,
there will be a performance penalty.
But the other case,
where you have a semi-transparent
CA Eagle layer being composited
on top of another view,
this is very expensive and has
a serious performance impact.
And I'll note, if you do this,
you must use pre-multiplied alpha
for proper compositing results.
And I've seen a number of scenarios
where developers have done this.
Sometimes it's intentional,
but many other times it doesn't seem like
it's being done for the right reasons.
The scenario where I think it
is for the right reason is in,
for example,
augmented reality types of applications,
where a CA Eagle layer is being overlaid
atop the UI image picker controller.
In iPhone OS 3.1,
there's a new property on the
image picker called Camera Overlay
View that's made for this very purpose.
So in that case,
you'll take the compositing hit
for blending your CA Eagle layer,
but at least what you're
doing is intentional.
But the scenario where I've seen this
compositing has been unnecessary has
been in applications that were actually
creating multiple CA Eagle layers and
stacking them up on top of each other.
And just to explain this,
the one on the bottom had
the background drawn in it,
the one in the middle had various sprites
being drawn and updated each frame,
and then a third one
on top had an overlay.
And this setup is very
inefficient and is not necessary.
Instead, it would be much more preferable
to collapse all three into a
single opaque CA Eagle layer.
So the takeaway is to make sure
your CA Eagle layer is opaque.
Set the opaque property of
the layer to yes and make sure
also your view opacity is 1.0.
And the final optimization relates
to other views which may be updating
or being animated at the same time
that you're rendering with OpenGL ES.
As I mentioned earlier,
you'll get faster performance
if any views overlaid atop
your CA Eagle layer are static.
Or the inverse,
you'll see best performance animating
your views if the CA Eagle layer
isn't being redrawn at the same time.
So the situation you should try to
avoid is when both are updating or
rendering or animating simultaneously.
And I've especially seen this,
for example,
in OpenGL-based applications that
overlay the main CA Eagle layer with
a UI label for the current score of a
game or current time or current speed.
Some other value that's
being updated every frame.
You have to minimize or
eliminate those updates to get
the best OpenGL ES performance.
Perhaps by rendering.
your times and scores and
so on directly in OpenGL.
Now, here's some great news, actually.
In Instruments, you can bring up the
Core Animation Instrument,
and this has a number of diagnostics that
you can enable from its debug options
to monitor the compositor workload.
And if you click these checkboxes
while your device is attached,
it'll show you any
blending that's going on,
any updates,
and whether your OpenGL rendering
is on the fast path,
and so on.
So I'd like to show you
how to do this yourself.
Okay,
I'm going to bring up instruments and
go into the core animation instrument.
I have my iPhone attached.
Great.
And now I'll bring up the debug options.
And you can see a number
of checkboxes here.
Now I'm going to switch over to the
phone and show you what's happening on
device as I make various selections.
All right, so here we are on the iPhone.
I'd like to show you first
from the core animation
instrument color blended layers.
You can see that even
here in the springboard.
That'll show you the different
layers on the device.
Now, green means that these pixels are
basically going through without
any extra compositing work.
And red is extra compositing for
layers that are being shown here.
Now, this is really visible in one of the
examples that we've put up on the iPhone
Dev Center called GL image processing.
This is an OpenGL example that has
down at the bottom you can see a tab
bar and then in the middle a slider.
And also you can see up
at the top the menu bar.
Now, there's a number of hotspots
here as you can tell.
So, for example,
with the slider on the bottom,
you can see that that is being composited
directly over the OpenGL scene.
And it's colored red for that reason.
Now, I'm going to turn on
flash updated regions.
Great.
So,
now what this is showing is as I move.
As I select different items in the tab
bar or as I move the slider around.
You can see the parts of the
screen that are actually being
recomposited every frame.
And so these would be a performance
hit in OpenGL if you were doing
OpenGL rendering at the same time.
And then finally,
let me turn these off and then I'll go
to show color the OpenGL FastPath blue.
Now, here you see actually most of the
pixels are coming through blue.
And so that's very good.
The only ones that aren't.
Are for the tab bar at the bottom.
And also, of course,
the slider that's been put on top.
So, those would be some hotspots.
So, you might want to look at in this
application if you were really
trying to optimize core animation
and the interaction with OpenGL ES.
So that's a quick look at using
the Core Animation Instrument to
see if your rendering is optimal
or if it's requiring the display
system to do a lot of extra work.
It's a great resource and I'd actually
recommend pausing this video right
now and trying it out with your app.
So, to summarize,
the CA Eagle layer is a layer subclass
that OpenGL ES uses to participate
in the normal view hierarchy.
But OpenGL developers should try to
optimize this interaction between
OpenGL ES and core animation.
And the things to look
at are the color format,
retain backing, and transform properties
of the CA Eagle layer.
And to eliminate any cases where
the layer itself is being alpha
blended over other UIKit content.
And minimize any other drawing
being done at the same time.
And you can use the debug options in the
core animation instrument to check out
what's actually happening in your app.
All right, that was a big topic.
[Transcript missing]
Next,
I have a few pieces of general guidance
about managing your rendering loop.
The first is that it's frequently a
good idea to limit your frame rate
to what you can normally achieve
based on your average rendering load,
rather than just running
as fast as you can.
It's because an erratic frame rate,
meaning one that changes every few
frames as your rendering load changes,
can be really jarring to the user and
give them the impression of a very choppy
and unsteady motion in your application.
It's usually a better idea
to set your frame rate to,
say, 30 and always hit it than to set it
to 60 and miss it every few frames,
if that's the situation
your app would be in.
A second bit of guidance is that
many kinds of applications don't
necessarily need to be blasting
the graphics pipeline at 30 or 60
frames per second all the time.
Particularly if your frame
isn't changing at the moment,
you could slow down or
even pause your rendering.
Certain casual games, for example,
like a chess game,
might be waiting for the user
to make a move and could pull
back on the workload given to the
CPU and the graphics processor.
and that can have a big
savings on battery usage.
Both CA DisplayLink and NSTimers
have a facility for handling this.
And then a quick note about the
behavior of present render buffer.
This is what you call at the
end of every frame in OpenGL ES,
and the contents of the render
buffer actually become undefined
after they're presented.
Now,
on devices with the PowerVR MBX Lite,
it just happened that the
contents would remain unchanged,
even though that was
technically an undefined result.
Now, that behavior is not what you'll
see on devices with the PowerVR SGX.
The contents actually are
destroyed after the call to
present render buffer on those.
So you either need to redraw the
entire render buffer every frame,
or if you do need to retain the contents,
then you can enable retain
backing with a performance cost.
And a final note about
the rendering loop,
less significant than what I've
covered in previous slides,
but still worthwhile, has to do with the
OpenGL ES template itself.
The template was written
very defensively,
assuming that developers
will extend it in many ways.
So it's built to handle the possibility
that you are managing multiple
OpenGL contexts or have multiple
render buffer attachments and so on.
But if you're not doing those things,
then those calls are being made every
frame to set the context and bind
the frame buffer and render buffer.
Those become redundant.
They're already set before you get
into the rendering loop and you
don't need to reset them every frame.
So you could just take them out and
save a small amount of overhead.
The render or draw frame method in the
template typically set up the context,
then it would bind the
default frame buffer,
then issue a bunch of
OpenGL commands to draw something,
then binds the color render buffer,
and finally calls present render buffer.
But for the most basic applications,
all you really need to be calling
each frame are your drawing
commands and present render buffer.
All right,
so that's coverage of the render loop.
So just remember,
make a runtime decision of how you drive
your render loop based on the OS version.
If you're running on 3.1 or above,
you can use CA Display Link,
and otherwise you'll use timers or
another method you've developed.
You should limit your frame
rate so it will remain steady
as your rendering load changes,
and pause your rendering
if nothing is changing.
And finally,
note that a few of these calls in the
template are redundant and can be removed
if you're not using multiple contexts or
multiple framebuffer object attachments.
And the final topic for this video
has to do with a bit of optimization
that you can do for the ARM processor.
So let me start with devices that
support the ARMv6 processor architecture.
This is the original iPhone,
the iPhone 3G, and first and second
generation iPod touch.
And when the compiler is
generating code for these devices,
it will use either the thumb
instruction set or ARM instruction set.
And thumb is the default.
Thumb instructions are 16-bit wide
instead of 32-bit wide for ARM,
which means that you can pack
twice as many thumb instructions
into the same code space as a
given number of ARM instructions.
That reduces your overall code size
for your binary by a fair amount,
potentially, and it allows twice as many
instructions to be present in the
cache at any particular moment.
But the thumb instruction set
does not support floating point.
So when the compiler needs
to generate instructions to
handle some floating point code,
it actually briefly switches over
to the native ARM instruction set,
executes those instructions,
and then switches back.
And that switch comes with
a slight performance cost.
Now, many applications never notice
this because they don't do enough
floating point calculations
for it to really be an issue.
And they more than make up for it
by having more instructions take
advantage of the instruction cache.
But many graphical applications,
and in particular many
OpenGL ES-based applications,
are more floating-point
heavy than average.
And the overhead of this switching
back and forth becomes noticeable.
So in those instances,
and only on the devices that use
the ARMv6 processor architecture,
we recommend telling the compiler to
generate ARM instructions all the time.
You lose the advantages of the smaller
code size and the gains you would have
from having more instructions in cache,
but now floating-point calculations
can be handled without the
extra switching overhead,
which for floating-point
heavy applications can be a
significant net performance win.
Now, as I said,
this optimization is specific to devices
supporting the ARMv6 architecture.
And again, those are the original iPhone,
iPhone 3G, and first and second
generation iPod touch.
Now, if on the other hand,
your application is running on a device
that supports the ARMv7 architecture,
and this is specifically the iPhone 3GS
and the third generation iPod touch,
then in this case,
we recommend sticking with Thumb.
Or for this architecture,
it's actually called Thumb 2.
And Thumb 2 has a hybrid instruction set,
mostly consisting of 16-bit instructions,
but also containing 32-bit
extensions for floating point.
So with Thumb 2,
you get all the advantages
of regular Thumb,
the smaller code size,
more instructions in the cache,
while also natively supporting
floating point without
needing to switch to ARM mode.
And in fact, on these devices supporting
the ARMv7 architecture,
using the ARM instruction
set doesn't buy you anything.
You just get less advantage
from the instruction cache
and a larger executable.
So as a practical matter,
this means that we need to set up our
build so that we create both an ARMv7.
So we'll create an ARMv6 and
an ARMv7 version of our binary.
Then we'll turn Thumb off for the
ARMv6 binary and leave Thumb 2
turned on for the ARMv7 binary.
That's a lot to keep straight,
so I'll walk you through how it's done.
And some of this is actually
already baked into the
OpenGL ES application template in Xcode.
So in this case,
I'm going to use the view template
of a view-based application,
just to have a clean start.
And I start by opening up my target info.
Going to the build settings.
And first I'm going to go
into the architecture setting
and set this to optimized,
both ARMv6 and v7.
So this will instruct the compiler
to generate both an ARMv6 and
ARMv7 version of my binary,
and will put both of them
into my application bundle.
This idea is very similar to
that of a universal binary
on the Mac desktop systems.
Next I'll find my thumb settings.
And there it is, compile for thumb.
Right now it's turned on.
And if I highlight this,
see if I turn it off,
it'll be off for both ARMv6 and ARMv7.
And instead what I want is to set
up a conditional build setting.
So I'll do that here,
add build setting condition.
And if I select Arm 6, Arm v6,
I'll create another one,
somewhat redundant,
but just for completeness, Arm v7.
So I want thumb to be turned on for
Arm v7 and turned off for Arm v6.
That's what I have.
And that's it.
Now my project is set up to build with
the ARM instruction set on ARMv6 and with
the Thumb2 instruction set for ARMv7.
All right, so that concludes Part 1 of
Mastering OpenGL ES for iPhone.
I've covered OpenGL ES versions,
had a long discussion about
optimizing compositing,
introduced CA DisplayLink,
and ended with details
about thumb and arm.
In Part 2, I dive much deeper
within OpenGL ES itself.
I cover the common architecture,
the capabilities,
and the differences between the
PowerVR MBX Lite and the PowerVR SGX.
Then dive deep into texture
optimization and geometry optimization.
So I hope you'll stay tuned for that.
In the meantime,
here's my contact information and
a link to the iPhone Dev Center,
where you'll find a variety
of OpenGL ES-based sample
code projects and the
OpenGL ES programming guide for iPhone.
And you can also find me
online in the developer forums.
Thank you for watching.